This is Jockelbodcast number 338 with echo Charles and me,
Jockel Willink, good evening echo.
When I was teaching close quarters combat,
which is, you know, going into rooms, going into buildings,
and clearing rooms, and clearing buildings, clearing hallways,
clearing stairwells, there's all kinds of things
that a seal has to do correctly when they do this,
and there are a lot of rules.
A lot of standard operating procedures that you have to follow,
how you enter the room, where your feet go,
where you aim your weapon, and where you don't aim your weapon.
How far you stay off the wall, what you say to your shooting buddy
when you need to move, what you, how you respond to your shooting buddy,
when he needs to move.
There's a bunch of verbal and non-verbal signals that you give
with your voice, with your weapon, with your posture, with your actions.
You got to know how to give those signals, you got to know how to receive those signals.
And then there's a bunch of calls that you actually make,
and again, some of those calls you make, and you pass that word via
verbal or other types of visual signals,
when to move, where to move, what to address,
in a particular room or in a hallway or in a building,
because you got to prioritize an execute,
and you go into room, there's multiple things going on.
You got to figure out which one's the most important one.
You got to support your shooting buddy at all times.
That's covered move.
You got to do all this with simple clear concise communication.
You got to make sure that while you're doing all these things,
you're supporting the overall intent to the mission,
which is decentralized command.
So there's a whole bunch of things going on.
When you're doing close quarters combat,
and when I taught this,
there was, you know, we as instructor,
cadre would get really critical about
the actions that the guys entering, the room,
made, because we wanted them to stay tight on the SOPs,
because imagine you enter a room and you go
where you're not supposed to go,
you can get shot by your partner.
So you got to get guys to do the right thing,
and then they've got to be able to make decisions,
they've got to be able to make decisions quickly.
And so us as cadre,
we would definitely help on these guys
and give them firm critique when they screwed something up,
and you're too far off the wall,
or you should address that open door first,
or you can clear behind that couch over there.
So we're getting on these guys,
and there's a million points to critique and criticize,
and we did that.
And again, the reason we did that was to make sure
that they follow the SOPs,
because when you get into a platoon or you're in a platoon,
and you don't follow the SOPs,
there's some SOPs if you don't follow them in CQC,
you can get yourself killed, you can get your buddy killed,
you can get the everybody killed.
So we're hyper critical.
Now, as I watch that,
as my cadre, as I watch my cadre,
I sort of detached and would let the cadre
sort of run those finer points of the standard operating procedures.
And I got to a point where,
I would talk to guys when they do something wrong,
where I'd say, hey, you did what you did.
Let's figure out why.
So in other words, oh, echo went into the room,
and he addressed this door instead of that couch first,
and I could say, hey, that door was open.
It's a big, I would say, hey, echo,
you addressed the couch and you turned your back on the door.
What were you thinking about?
Because I wanted to know why you did it,
so that I can learn more,
and I can allow me to teach better.
If I know why you did something,
and you say, well, you know,
I thought that the biggest threat was the one that was closest to me.
Well, this one might be further away,
but if it's a bigger space to hide
behind whatever the case may be.
So, as I learned why people made mistakes
that helped me be able to teach these things better,
because then I could close some of those loose ends,
as I'm teaching it.
And I took this to other areas of training,
as well, especially with the leaders, right?
Especially with the leaders, the young,
see the leaders trying to understand,
not just what they did wrong,
and point out to them what they did wrong,
but why they did it, so that I could adjust the training
to address the shortfall, and I could address,
and adjust my own methodology of instruction
to make sure that I explained it in a way
that they understood why we were doing something a certain way.
So, I need to figure out, I needed to figure out
what they were thinking and why they were thinking it,
and I learned a lot from doing that.
And of course, we would do this type of thing after missions,
as well, you know, the debrief.
We get on with a mission, we immediately are going to go do a debrief.
What happened, why it happened, what we could do better,
and of course, if we had a someone on the team
that mess something up, I would talk to them about why they did it,
not just remo-out because they screwed up,
but hey, what were you thinking when you made that move?
What were you thinking, why did you move into that building?
What did you think was going to happen?
And, you know, if you read Extreme Ownership,
the first chapter after the blue on blue,
of course, we obviously debriefed,
and we created some new standard operating procedures
to prevent it from happening again,
or at least mitigate the risk as much as we could.
And if you read the rest of the book,
there were even more situations that we talk about in the book
that were close to being catastrophic,
fracture sites, catastrophic blue on blues.
But we were able to stop those from happening
either from our procedures that we had put in place,
or our better understanding of what could unfold,
or our awareness of what was happening.
And when I got home from that deployment,
I debriefed that operation, that blue on blue,
I debriefed over and over again to the seal teams
and the platoons that were going through training,
and the troops that were going through training,
to try and pass on the lessons learned to everyone,
and then we set up training
that we organized the training
so that those lessons learned would get embedded
into these young seal leaders.
They would understand how these things happened,
so they could prevent them from happening,
and I was told many times over the years,
that the training and awareness that we gave people,
prevented many friendly fire incidences from happening.
And in case in point Jason Gardner's got a few
in that he that happened to him on his deployment
to Afghanistan where he straight up said,
you know, like, if I wouldn't have been aware,
we wouldn't have had that blue on blue training,
that this we probably would have had a blue on blue for real.
So I heard that many times.
Now, a lot of people have been asking me
about the horrific scenario that unfolded
in Evaldae, Texas.
Psychotic and socio-pathic gunmen entered a school
and killed 19 innocent children and two adults.
And I can't even fathom the grief and the fact that
the just trauma for those families, the horror, the whole
in their lives that they have now that can never be replaced.
And the potential of life that was thrown away
before it even had a chance to grow.
And it's just a completely heart-breaking situation.
And what has made the situation even harder to process
was the response from law enforcement on the scene.
And of course, we all like to think about and talk about what I would have done.
But I would have done if I were there.
And I get that, everyone is horrified by what took place.
And we all like to think that we would have been brave
or that we would have been more decisive
that we would have had more situational awareness
that we would have handled the scenario in a way
that created a better outcome.
Of course, we all like to, we would all give anything
to be able to create a better outcome in that situation.
And unfortunately, the situation has already happened.
The outcome is complete.
And we can't change what happened.
And what the response was, any more than I could change the decision
a young seal made when he walked into Roman, moved the wrong way,
or addressed the wrong threat, I couldn't change what he had done.
I could tell him what he did wrong, but what I really needed to do
as I said was to understand why he made that decision
and learn from it.
And then figure out how I could teach other people
to not make that mistake.
And that is unfortunately the best I can offer in this
situation as well.
Now, there are other things to talk about
with regards to contributing factors in this situation.
And you've got mental health, you've got media violence,
you've got dehumanization of people, you've got gun laws,
and they're enforcement or lack of enforcement.
And I talked about some of those on the Jocco and Ravling podcast
with Darrell Cooper and all those, the thing is with all those,
those are massive subjects.
Those are massive subjects, all of them that are being discussed
at the national level and will take some unified efforts
to solve.
They'll take some unified efforts and by that I mean people actually
working together, which we don't seem to have any of.
So as that conversation continues to take place,
I just want to look at what happened
tactically on the ground and try and figure out why it happened.
And I'm going to use a timeline, follow a timeline from the Texas Tribune.
It was last updated on June 9th and just just to note,
we're recording this today on June 13th, 2022.
And it's just based on simple open source reporting.
And I'm sure that there will be more detailed information available in the future
and maybe at some point we'll go over it with more detail.
But the thing is there are lessons to be learned
even from what we know right now
that that I want to talk a little bit about again from the tactical perspective
to try and figure out why things happened like this in this event.
So again from the Texas Tribune, this is May 24th, 2022 around 11am.
The shooter sends Facebook messages.
The shooter sends private Facebook messages to a girl in Germany.
He met online and tells her about his plans to shoot his grandmother.
The gunman shoots his grandmother in the face and calls the police.
The shooter steals his grandmother's vehicle and drives from his home
to Rob Elementary School, which is about two miles away.
So there you have a clear declaration that something bad is going to happen made by the
individual himself and I don't know if there's some kind of a social media 911 call that you can make.
It seems like there should be some kind of a social media 911 to call
where if someone is making threats of violence via social media that people that see these threats
can have someone to contact where action can be taken.
And I don't know if there is an AI that can screen for things like this.
My guess is yes considering that if I Google search something on my phone or on my laptop
the very next screen that I click I get advertisements for whatever that thing that I just searched is.
So to think that we couldn't come up with or that the tech companies couldn't come up with something
that was coming through messages coming through posts looking for threatening content.
It seems like that would be a feasible thing.
And at a minimum to have something where there's like a universal 911 call to make if someone is posting
threatening things it seems like that would be a move that would be over the help
these when these situations unfold.
Moving to 1128 AM the shooter arrives at the school.
The shooter crashes the vehicle into a ditch near the school.
He fires his gun at two male witnesses who began approaching the crash from a nearby funeral home.
The witness is fleeing call 911.
So this is at 1128.
When you get a shooter that's in the vicinity of a school there's got to be a really good lockdown
protocol that happens.
And this is something when we talk about lockdown protocol
one thing that that I think needs to be discussed is if you have a shooter that's
external to the school lock the doors.
But when you have a shooter that's in the school
everyone should get the hell out of the school.
You shouldn't keep people in the school anymore.
So having a couple different immediate action drills
when it comes to when when when when a shooter is either in a school we're going to get out of the school.
If it's outside the school we're going to stay in the school we're going to lock it down.
Those require two different reactions not one.
Because if there's a shooter in the school you should get the hell out of the school.
1130 AM a teacher calls 911.
Teacher at the elementary school makes a 911 call reporting the crash and seeing the shooter noting he has a gun.
The shooter walks toward the school climbs the fence into the parking lot and shoots at the school several times.
Again, if the shooters outside the school we should have an instant protocol to keep them outside the school.
1131 AM shooter walks into school parking lot.
The shooter reaches the last row of vehicles in the school parking lot firing his rifle throughout.
Police arrive at the funeral home.
So you remember the people that initially reacted to the crash they ran back to a funeral home called the police.
The police now arrive at the funeral home.
A school district police officer speeds in the direction of a person they think is the man with the gun
reported by the teacher but drives past the gunmen and heads to the back of the school
mistaking a teacher for the shooter.
So you have a problem of positive identification now.
Where you got teachers who are the only adults in the schools except for the shooter.
So how are you going to tell them apart?
This is where we look and say hey is there an armband that we have?
Is there an emergency everyone knows to put on a certain t-shirt or a certain vest?
And you know you might be thinking all that sounds stupid.
If you've ever been into a combat situation where there's multiple people running around on the battlefield,
positive identification is a real problem.
It is really hard to identify who's who.
And you can make it a lot easier if you throw if you give people some kind of a uniform to put on where,
oh all the teachers are wearing a vest that says teacher on it.
On orange vest.
11.33 am the shooter enters the school.
Shooter enters the school for the back through the back door.
He shoots at least 100 rounds inside classes, classrooms 11 11 and 112 which are connected.
Authorities originally said a teacher left the door prompt open, but later said a teacher
closed the door and the automatic lock failed.
And there's she's the a quote here.
She remembers pulling the door closed while telling 911 that he was shooting.
She thought the door would lock because the door is always supposed to lock.
I've heard some people talk about
the horrible idea of or what seems like a horrible idea of turning schools into
you know bunkers type of thing.
Oh we can have our guards every.
And look no one wants to bring their kids to a school where the school feels like it's a reverse
prison right or some kind of a prison environment where you've got barbed wire and you've got bars
on the window and all this kind of stuff.
No one wants to bring their their kids to school like that.
But there is a way to properly secure schools where it doesn't look like some prison camp.
There's absolutely a way to make that happen.
And I think that just about any parent I think actually any parent would be okay
with having some security in place so that the school is a place where people can't get into
unless they're supposed to be there.
So the back doors open look does this mean I'm a little bit paranoid?
Mate yes.
Yeah little bit paranoid and I think a little bit of paranoia is actually okay.
A little bit of paranoia is actually okay.
So that was at 1133.
At 1135 the the Uvalde police enter the school.
Three police officers rushed to the same door that the gunman used to enter which was closed.
They enter receive grazing wounds from the gunman they retreat.
So response time has been, well 1128 AM the shooter arrives at the school.
1131 he's walking through the parking lot 1133 he enters the school.
The police arrive pretty quickly.
Now if there was some kind of security guard there I guess what response time is zero minutes.
And does this mean that your kid feels like he's going to school in a in a damn prison?
Because there's a plain closed security guard there.
I'm okay with that.
Do I love it?
No I don't.
But this is not that big of a price to pay to keep kids safe.
The idea that a guard or an armed guard has to be some over presence
that the kids have to walk by to get to class.
Oh there's you know Mr. Fred with the with the AR 15 guarding us.
I feel intimidated because I'm a little kid I don't like I don't like it.
It makes me feel uncomfortable.
Does it have to be like no it doesn't actually have to be that way at all.
There can be a very low visibility option for that.
And it can be a low visibility option that the children don't know much about but the
public does know about and therefore it also you it also causes deterrence for a would be school shooter.
If the would be school shooter knows that there are armed people in the school they're probably going to
figure out a different target.
So the police officers enter the school they get shot at.
That receive grazing wounds they retreat.
So this is a tough one to with what I know about you know they only were into
their retreat and that they that they received fire.
This could mean a bunch of different things.
This could mean full automatic fire that is at the shooting at the door that they're trying to get through.
And if that's the case and they proceed and they're just all going to die.
And now they can't help.
Or is it some rounds came and they immediately retreated? I don't know. I don't know what happened there.
I do know this.
When you're getting shot at you now have information.
You have very pertinent information.
You know the general location.
If you're taking rounds you you know where they're you know at least a little bit where they're coming from.
So now we can start to formulate some kind of a plan.
You also know that you've got a high threat scenario and you've got children in there.
Now you can't just put down cover fire and shoot back at a person in the school because there's a bunch of kids.
And you can get a friendly fire scenario happening.
So you can't just lay down cover fire like you would over in a you know foreign country in a war.
But you know where the bad guy is generally speaking.
You know at least the door that you're at he has covered which tells you what.
There's other doors that he may not have covered.
Meaning other doors where he may not be able to engage.
So we've tried one entry and we have now an information that we can't get in there.
So now what are we going to do find another place to go?
Going back to the timeline here.
Pete Eradondo the chief of the school districts police department also arrives at the scene around this time.
He does not have his radios.
Eradondo wanted both hands on his gun if he encountered the shooter and believed the radios would have slowed him down.
His attorney said.
Now that's.
This is not this is not even a thing.
It's not even a this is not even a remotely.
Square to a concept in anyway.
What the radio going in.
Get going.
A the radio told you down.
B both hands on your gun.
I mean you don't carry your radio in your hand while you're shooting.
You have you have your radio.
You have a mic to to talk into if you need to.
You going into a situation like this.
Communication during an event like this is beyond critical.
There's beyond critical, especially if you're the chief.
If you're overall in charge of what's happening.
You are the one person that absolutely needs a radio and you're at so does everybody else.
Now you don't always sometimes you don't always have every single person with a radio.
But if you're overall in charge, you're the one that's going to be communicating, receiving
communications, giving directions.
You're the one that's supposed to get an overall concept of what's happening.
Now this is an insane lack of judgment.
And I would love to pull the thread on this and figure out what actually happened.
My guess is some the chief didn't look in his car, see his radio and go, you know what?
I'm going to leave my radio here.
My guess is that's not what happened.
That might be what the lawyer's saying.
As a rationalization well, he thought he might need it.
He thought it might slow him down and thought that he want to have both hands on his guns.
On his gun.
That might be a post-operation rationalization.
Excuse my guess is that in the panic of the situation,
he didn't think about it for God.
By the way, this points to an equally insane lack of training.
Because no one ever in any kind of scenario ever where more than one person is acting
in different parts of a team decides not to bring a radio.
That's not a decision that anyone is going to make.
I would grab my radio before, if I was in charge, I'd grab my radio before I grab my weapon.
How you like that?
So to be in charge and to decide not to bring your radio is
complete not a failure.
And you're obviously in some things where they ran some scenarios.
Like this, the training, if you train one time doing this and you're in charge,
you'll say damn, I better make sure I have good communications with my team.
If you do this one time, if you approach a hostile target where there's bad guys in there,
one time, no hostages, no children, just one bad guy you put him in a building and you have
you and one other person, you'll make that radio an absolute priority.
One time, now you take a situation where you've got an active shooter and there's a bunch of kids
and you've got different units coming in from different places, you're gone off freaking
need a radio and you would know that if you had any training whatsoever.
Here's the thing, it takes practice and I know this sounds crazy because everyone's
look, everyone's on on chair quarterback and everyone can sit there and look, of course, I would
brought my radio, I'm telling you, I'm telling you this, it takes practice to know this.
As obvious as it seems to everyone right now, it takes practice, you hear kids screaming,
you hear gunshots going off, you're the person in charge, you're kind of panic and you go.
You haven't been trained to the proper level and you go in there with a radio.
So it's again reflects bad training.
And at this point, former officers, including a deputy with the county sheriff's office, also
enter the school at this time. So now we have seven police there against one and again,
I'm going to need to see the breakdown detail of the building itself of where people entered,
but you've got more people in the school now. And by the way, by my numbers, that seven police
against one shooter and I like those odds. Seven against one I like. 1137 gunman fires 16 more rounds.
Again, you have a school with little kids in it and the gunman is shooting. What that means is you go.
That's what that means. Let me refer to that. If you didn't already get the signal
that there's a freaking gunman in a school and you haven't done everything you can to get in there
and now that gunman is shooting again, that's another blaring signal to get your ass in there.
And by the way, these are not, these are lessons that have been learned. When you look
what happened at Column by and they came up with the same kind of conclusions, there was too much
hesitation, there's too much waiting. When you hear this stuff happening, you have to take action.
This is exactly the type of scenario where when I start with teaching the young seals,
I had to teach them to be default aggressive. This is the exact kind of scenario. The problem's not
going to solve itself. You have to go and solve it. That's what you have to do. And the reason that I
had to teach them to be aggressive and have that be their default motives because when things like
this happen, people's natural mode isn't to take action. For many people, their natural mode is,
oh, I don't know what's happening. I'm going to wait to try and figure out what's happening. That's what
they're instinct is. And we have to train that instinct out of many people, not all people.
Some people, you actually have to train in the other direction. Some people have to say, hey,
hold on a second, you have no idea what's happening. Don't go running in there. Most people,
you have to train, hey, if it's going on and you can't tell what's happening, you need to get
aggressive and figure out what's happening. You need to take action.
And in a situation like this, we're now you have a gunman in the school. It's still shooting.
It is time without question to do whatever you need to do to get in there. Now at 143 AM,
Rob Elementary and Yvalday Police Post on Facebook, they announced that the school is under
lockdown status to do gunshots in the area. By the way, this is like 150 rounds have been fired. The
students and staff are safe in the building. The building is secure in a lockdown status. School
officials say in an announcement. So there's no emergency communication in the building.
And what I mean by that, there's no, there's no
proword. So in the military, you have something called a proword, which is one word that means
something that means a whole scenario is taking place. So if I'm out on an operation and we start
taking fire heavy fire from the target building and we have an entered the target yet,
I have one word that I can say. And when I say that one word, everybody knows what to do.
Everyone knows that there's no friendlies in the building that the target building is shooting
heavy fire at us. I can say one word and everybody knows what to do.
If we have people in the target building, we start taking fire. I have one word I can say and everybody
knows what to do. So there's a breakdown of communication here because no one has put out,
hey, there's a freaking shooter in our school that's gunning people down.
No one knows this. So no one knows what's happening. So as you think through these scenarios,
you need to come up with some pro words so that everyone understands what's happening.
At the same time, the Valdi Police Department posts on Facebook, large police presence at
Rob Elementary, we ask the public to avoid the area. So there's not communication between the
school and the police. Do are there police radios in the school?
That seems like a really obvious question, but does the school have the ability to
communicate with the police directly through radios? Because this is not a very hard thing to figure out.
It's not a very costly thing to figure out.
1144 AM, the police officers are inside. Police with with the city of Uvaldi are and the school district
are inside the school. This is 1144. Uvaldi police officers enter the building where the shooter is
from the north entrance. They hear gunfire, our shot at, move back and get cover.
Again, if you're getting shot at, you now have a general idea of where the shooter is.
If you have a general idea where the shooter is, then it's time to maneuver. It's time to flank.
A shooter can only cover so many different directions at the same time.
And how do I know that? Because I've been on both sides of those scenarios.
When you train properly, you not only act as the good guys, you spend time as a bad guy.
So you start to realize what works and what doesn't work.
That's the benefit of training.
Back to the document. Around this time, Eradondo and another Uvaldi police officer enter the building
through the south entrance. Eradondo witnesses the gunfire. He then checks the door to the
classroom that the shooter is in finding it locked. He uses his cell phone to call for squad teams,
snipers, extrication tools, and keys to the classrooms.
This is at 11.44. So all this is taking place for almost over 20 minutes. This has been going on.
And only now we're getting a call for squad team snipers, breaching tools.
And it's on the cell phone. How why are we making calls on a cell phone?
Why is that happening?
We have radios. There's a reason you have radios direct communication.
In Centanius immediate direct communication to a whole net of people.
Oh, that's right. Well, he doesn't have his radios.
So he's making cell phone calls.
It says a niche. There's a quote in here.
Initial officers are there and receive gunfire. Therefore, do not make entry.
Officers call everyone in the area for additional resources. Tactical teams, equipment, specialty
equipment, body armor, precision riflemen, and negotiators. They're evacuating students and teachers
during this time. And this is from Victor Escalon, a DPS official during a press conference on May 26.
From the very beginning of this whole thing, you clearly have an active shooter that needs to
be hunted down and killed. That's completely evident from the first moments.
As soon as a car crashes and two guys go to help and they and he gets shot at,
or those two guys get shot at by someone who then maneuvers towards a school,
this is an active shooter situation and someone needs to hunt this guy down and kill him.
And that's the mode that needs to be gone into instantaneously.
And there's going to be risk.
There's going to be risk when you're going up against someone with a gun.
There's a risk that you're going to die. And that's what we in the military and law enforcement
sign up for. And we have to think through that actually and you have to train for that.
And the first time that you think about getting shot and the probability that you get shot
shouldn't be in an actual gunfight. This shouldn't be the first time this is going through your head.
You should do training and you need to do training, where you understand what you're going to
be put up against and you should understand what that feels like and you should either get over it
and accept that as part of your job or you should get a different job.
1148. There's an officers' wife is shot.
So you've got the CISD police officer, Ruben Ruiz, can be heard telling other officers as he arrives
inside the school that his wife, even Morrellis, has been shot.
So you look at this woman, the school teacher just seemed like an amazing human.
She's got pictures, there's pictures of her. She's outdoors, she's enjoying life, she's out
running, she's hiking, she's doing Spartan races, she's doing CrossFit, she's just seems like an awesome woman
and had a daughter with Ruben Ruiz. So he gets word that she shot.
1151 AM, Mor police arrive, more law enforcement officials arrive at the scene again.
So what are we doing at this point? Who is running things at this point in time?
Now you got 1520 law enforcement officers, on scene and you got one bad guy.
That's a fight we can win all day long. All day long. We're going to win and we might take some casualties
but we can win that fight all day long. 1154 AM, there's an onlooker starts filming.
21 minutes after the shooter enters the school and onlooker streams a live video showing
parents begging police to enter the school. Now this is very difficult to watch. This is actually
sickening to watch. There are parents that are going crazy with frustration. They want to help their kids.
And in some of these videos, you can see that the parents are being held back by officers
with long guns, with rifles, with assault rifles. And what they're doing is keeping the parents at bay.
Now here's what's difficult to understand. Most likely, I can just about guarantee these officers
that are doing this have no idea what's going on. They probably think they're doing the right
thing, which is, hey, there's an active shooter in there. My teammates are in there killing this
guy, so I need to make sure these civilians stay safe. That's what they're thinking. And why are they
thinking that? Because no one in this whole scenario is detached and connecting the pieces,
which is what needs to happen when this kind of thing goes down. Someone has got to take a step
back and piece together what's happening and put together a plan.
So these parents, you watch these parents, they actually are somewhat detached. The parents are
kind of detached because they can see that there's why is the shooting continuing? Why is this happening?
1203, please continue to arrive and a student calls 911 from inside a student calls 911 from
room 112 for a minute and 23 seconds and identifies herself in a whisper. Meanwhile, as many as 19
officers are positioned in the school's hallway, 19 officers. And now we know that we got kids in their
alive and you have 19 officers. 1210, the student calls back. Student calls 911 again and says
multiple people are dead. So now you know for sure, the shooter is a psychopath that needs to be stopped.
That's what you know. 1213 PM, student calls 911 again. Student calls a third time.
The 40s have not expanded on our comments during this call. 1215 Border Patrol Tactical
Unit arrives. Border Patrol Tactical Unit members carrying shields arrive.
And she looked, ballistic shields are a great, an awesome tool to have. For sure, they're great.
We're not waiting for this if there's kids that are going to be killed when I wait and for shields to show up.
1216 PM, student calls 911 once again. The student calls 911 again saying eight or nine
students are alive. So now we know we got live kids in there and we got more than enough people to
to make this happen. 1217 oddly enough the school announced there's an active shooter on campus.
I mean, what's happening in our overall, from an overall leadership perspective between the
school and the police when we have at 1217 as there's dead children, dead teachers and now we're
announcing that we have an active shooter on campus. The all-lookers, the parents are now begging for action.
Here's a little pull out. It's at some point during the standoff, all-lookers beg police to charge
the school according to the Associated Press. Parents try to break windows and are not allowed
to immediately be reunited with their children. Again, there's a video of this. It's
sickening to watch. There's parents yelling out, what are you doing? Get inside the building. Go protect the kids.
And there's a one mom. One mom, Angelie Rose Gomez. She gets cuffed. She gets cuffed for
quote, intervening with an active investigation. And I can't even give this woman enough props and
praise. She, she like pretended to calm down so that they would release her once they released her.
She distanced herself from the crowd, got away from like all the hype and all the mania. And then she
jumped the fence, went in and got her to kids out. Meanwhile, she said that other fathers
got tackled, pepper sprayed and tays. Again, somebody has to take a step back and get
control the situation and no one did that here. And is there a chance that someone in this group
of people, one of these police officers, happens to be a really good leader and happens to understand
what to do in dynamic situations and happens to have the authority and the leadership skill to get
control of the situation? Is there a chance that someone might have that? There's a chance,
there's also a chance that no one has that. And that's why you have to train people so that they
can perform in these situations. And by the way, the training is also screening to see what kind of
personality people have. And see what kind of shortfalls they have as leaders. And some people
don't have the cognitive capacity to make these decisions. And some people don't have the
the cognitive capacity to take a step back. And some people don't have the wherewithal
to press through in tough scenarios. And so as leaders, we need to know who those people are.
This mom, Miss Gomez, Miss Gomez, she is that type of person to take action, to be default
aggressive, get things solved. She was detached enough emotionally to realize she had to get away from
the mob, get to a position where she can maneuver in. She was able to do this.
Some people have that natural ability. Some people don't. And I'm going to get to this in a little
bit. There's also training that has to be overcome. Sometimes people fall into training habits that
aren't good. So we have to train to the point that we recognize when what we've been trained to do
isn't working. 12. 19. PM. Another student calls 911 from from room 11. Hangs up when another
student tells her to 12. 21. Gunman fires again. Authorities say he was believed to be at the
classrooms door. On a 911 call from a student three gunshots can be heard. This is over and over again.
Then things that would mean to me as a tactical leader we go right now. There's time after time,
after time, after time. There's execute criteria. A room full of kids. There's a guy in there
is shooting. You go. There's not a debate. You go. That's what you do. You go. You go through the windows.
You breach the doors. You do whatever you got to do to get in there. That's what you do.
12. 36. Student in room 11. Calls back again. Same student calls back for 21 seconds
and is told to stay on the line quietly. 12.43 gunman shoots the door. The student tells 9.11 that
the gunman shot the door. Okay. There's another execute criteria.
And you do what you have to do to get in there. Windows. You put ladders up to the windows. You crash.
You crash through those windows. You crash a vehicle into the windows. You shoot the door off the hinges.
That's what you do. 12.46. I can hear the police next door. Student called 9.11. 12.46.
Eradando gives the approval to enter. If you're all ready to do it, you do it. He says according
to a transcript of police body cam footage. 12.46. 12.46. Over an hour.
12.47. 911 call from a student. Please send police now. 12.50. Border Patrol Tactical Unit Officer
Breach is the room and uses a janitor's keys and kills the gunman.
And I don't have any details on how that actually happened yet.
I know Bortak people, which is the Border Patrol Tactical Unit Bortak. I know them. I've actually
worked with them a little bit. I've got some reports that they disobeyed orders. People were telling
them not to enter and they did it. Anyways, good on them. But what I've been saying this whole time,
go in, go in, go in, go in. And you think to yourself, well, if you go in or you're going to get
shot, if you go in, is this going to happen? You don't know. But look what happens when these guys
finally go in. They go in there and they kill the guy. That's what happens. You got to go on offense.
12.51. Children are moved out of the room.
12.51. 106 police announced the shooter is in custody because the Border Patrol and they're
killed them. And then you vowed the police announced on Facebook that the shooter is in custody
authorities recanted that information later. So, there you have it. What can we learn from this?
And again, at this point in time, I'm focused on what could we learn from this tactical situation
that unfolded? What can we learn from it? I know there's a whole bunch of a whole slew of other topics
to talk about. And those are happening on a massive level. And those will continue to happen.
But as an area that I actually know a decent amount about is this. So that's what I'm talking about.
And first of all, and I've been saying this for years, police need more training.
Police 20% of time, 20% of working hours for police should be spent training.
That's what should happen. That's what needs to happen. And listen, you think, oh,
that that there's now going to be less people out on patrol, less police out on patrol?
They're their effectiveness will more than make up for the fact that there's less police on patrol.
Who would you rather if you were in a hostage situation with some crazy person in your house?
Who would you rather have show up 10 untrained people or 8 highly trained people?
And if you're not sure about that, let me tell you because I guarantee you all day long, I'll
take 8 highly trained people over 10 untrained people all day. All day.
And I'll tell you, I am now, I've started to talk to some organizations
to see how echelon front my company can help do this on a national level. What should this training
consist of? What are we training? Police in?
Well, combatives for one thing, shooting, breaching. First aid trauma.
Deescalation. And anybody that's listening that doesn't know much about the police,
you might think they do all this stuff all the time. They don't. They don't do this all the time.
They barely get to shoot. I bet you 99% of police have very limited training if any in breaching
and how to breach a door with a shot gun.
Combatives, barely any. Barely any training. Close quarters combat, room clearing.
Urban combat clearance. How do you handle an active shooter? How do you handle a barricade
shooter? And then you've got to run scenarios. You've got to put people into these situations.
You've got to get a simulation or some kind of round that can be fired at other people during training.
You need assets. You need role players so that people get used to it.
And you absolutely get better. This is exactly what I did for a living.
Was trained young seals so that they understand what to do in these types of situations. And you
can watch and see them learn and get better. And over time, they eventually get to a point where
they know exactly what to do. Yeah, they learn about the basic fundamental principles.
Cover and move simple. Prioritize next to your decentralized command. They're going to learn about those
things. They're going to learn about decentralized command, which means when I show up and there's
something going on and I'm the junior guy, but I'm the first person there. I can make things happen.
I can make decisions. I know what the priorities are. That's what they learn.
They learn how to detach. You've heard me say someone's got to take a step back and figure out
what's happening broadly. Well, that's what people learn when you run them through the appropriate
training. They learn how to communicate. They learn the importance of communications. They learn
not to go into dynamic scenarios without a radio so they can communicate with the rest of their troops.
This so much of this whole thing was people not seeing the big picture. No one assembled
the entire scene to understand what was happening. And therefore no one made the broad call that
needed to be made, which is get in there. Get in there. We're going. And this does take training.
It does take training. Now it doesn't take training if you're a parent and your kids in there.
That doesn't take any training. That's instinct. And I'll talk a little bit about that.
But it takes training. I had experience seals. I would have experience seals that would fail
to take action when they needed to. And we'd have to have them do that training again. And maybe
again, and maybe again, until they realize that when they don't take action, everything's going to fall apart.
So even seals would have a hard time in some cases figuring these things out.
Now, like I said, the parents that were there, they were detached. And maybe not emotionally
because they're they're obviously horrified by what's going on. But some of the parents you can
go watch the videos, they're making matter of fact statements about what was going on.
They're saying there's kids in there. They're shooting going on.
Now to this idea of instinct, which I mentioned, instinct versus methodology versus instinct.
Okay, you have an instinct of what to do. And in some cases, you need to get trained against that
instinct. It's just like in jujitsu. There's certain things where your instinct is wrong.
And so it takes some training to teach you to overcome your instinct.
To learn a methodology that's superior to the instinct. And there are times when the methodology
is wrong and the instinct is correct. What do I mean by that? I got a story about JP to Nell,
JP to Nell. One of my guys in my last deployment to Iraq. And outstanding guy, seal,
sniper, point man, outstanding guy. And when we first started working together, we were out in the desert.
And we're doing a patrol out in the desert. And the patrol stopped. And I'm looking at JP.
And JP standing out in the open. He's standing out in the open. Now we're out in the desert,
but it's not a barren desert. There's rocks and shrubs and micro-terrain features. And we stop our
patrol and JP standing out in the open. And I walk over to him. And I said, hey, JP, if you were 10 years
old right now and we were playing war, where would you be standing? And he pointed over to a little
bush with some rocks rounded with a little terrain to hide behind. And he said, right over there.
And I said, let your 10s 10 year old instinct. Let it come to life. Let it do its job. That's where you
should be. I know the standard operating procedure is when the patrol stops. You set down
a near position in your field of fire. You halt and you stay there. But if you can move six yards
and have good-covering concealment, that's what you should do. So sometimes people train to a point
like these police officers probably and I've heard some talk about this. Hey, it's a barricaded
shooter, which means we he's going to be staying there and we should negotiate. So they got in this
mode of well-barricaded shooter. We should just negotiate with them. The reality of the situation
it wasn't barricaded shooter. He was moving around. He was still shooting the entire time.
That's not a barricaded shooter that's decided to hold up and negotiate for some kind of ransom.
Not at all. They got stuck in that mode.
What needed to happen was action. A methodical entry, a perfect entry into the building.
If you were to plot out the perfect close quarters combat operation for this school and how many
people you would need and what methodology you would move for the building and what type of breaches
you would use on the doors and which would be most efficient. All that stuff goes out the window
when there's an active shooter in the room with a bunch of kids, your instinct needs to be to get in there
and some of those parents had that instinct. Yelling, get into the building.
But the training methodology had boxed these guys in mentally. Where they thought, oh well, we don't
have shields. And this is a speculating at this point. But oh, if we don't have ballistic shields, we
shouldn't go in there. Hey, we were taught not to go into a shooter situation, an active shooter
situation without ballistic shields. We're waiting for the ballistic shields. No, that's the methodology
been talked. It's not working right now. What about the windows? Walking up to the windows, smashing
a window, shooting through the window. You can do that throwing crash grenades through the windows.
Put 10 crash grenades through the windows on this guy. There's a bunch of different things that
if you do what you would naturally do in a situation, you're probably right.
So what you have to do is you're going to have instinct. You're going to have a natural instinct.
The instinct could be wrong. The instinct could be right.
I mean, here's an instinct. What's something shooting? I mean, I'm going to run away.
And I'm not going to go back. So police officers have to overcome that instinct to go and stay
and maneuver towards fire. That's overcoming their natural instinct.
But there's sometimes where the methodology is wrong. And so you have to be good enough to overcome
your methodology and go if you're instincts sometimes.
Are you, it's another thing I used to say to these young seals.
If you, I'd say, hey, if you were going to go in that room right now and I was in there and you
were 10 years old and I was 10 years old and I had a squirt gun and you had a squirt gun.
And you were going to enter this room. How would you do it? And they'd show me.
And I'd say, doesn't that make more sense than what you just did and they'd say, yeah, it does.
But they would follow some standard operating procedures that didn't make sense in a particular room.
But they would do what they were taught to do even though it didn't make sense.
And the ability to decide whether your instinct is right or wrong,
you get that ability by being able to take a step back and assess. And the way you get that ability
to take a step back and assess is through training.
And it takes time. And that's why I use that term, that that idea of 20% of time for police officers
should be spent training. And you're going to end up with infinitely more qualified and prepared police.
There was a fighting methodology, a combatives methodology, a system that was being used in the
seal teams. And it was ineffective. It was ineffective system. But one of the reasons that it was
argued to be a good system was because there was a one week course of instruction of this fighting
methodology that if you took this one week course of instruction, then you were qualified
and allegedly prepared for combat. Well, you can't learn to fight one week. There's not going to
happen. You can't learn good combatives skills in one week. And so I was bringing up to my chain of command.
Hey, this combative system is ineffective. We should use some kind of a more mixed martial arts
combination of jujitsu wrestling boxing, mojitai using our weapons in those scenarios.
And one of the arguments that I got against that idea was that all that stuff takes years to learn.
It takes years to learn this stuff. This stuff we can teach people in a week.
Well, you know what I said to that? I said, well, we're in the damn teams for 20 years.
Let people get good. You shouldn't tell someone that after a week of training, they're going to be good
to go. They're not training has to happen all the time. And by the way, eventually, we do have a great
jujitsu wrestling boxing mojitai based combative system in the seal teams,
which is you also utilize your weapons, you utilize your gear, but it's based in these things that work.
And it takes time to get good at. No one says, oh, you've been through one week course. You can handle
yourself now because we know that that's not true. So it comes down to training. And there's a look.
Are there a bunch of other factors, a bunch of other things that we can address? Yes,
there are absolutely are. There are a bunch of other things to talk about.
But like I said, this is something that I know and something that I understand training people
for stressful, dynamic, dangerous situations. And that's what we need to do with our law enforcement.
We need to train them properly. Because we owe it to them. We owe it to our police and law
enforcement to train them properly. We owe it to the law abiding citizens of this country.
And of course, we owe it to the innocent children.
They're just trying to get their freaking education in school. So that's my initial take on this scenario.
Again, I talked about some of the other factors with their Cooper on our unraveling podcast.
But I wonder who dressed this here and try and get this word out.
With that Equitrals. Yes. You know, like, let's have some of these things happen. You hear
of all these solutions. On the cards and schools, gun control laws. Like, you know,
everyone has their take. What do you think are some of the solutions that off the top of your head
that are not practical or doable or probably wouldn't be affected that you've heard?
There's a whole slew of things going on. And there's many facets that lead to this
situation. As far as I don't really think too much about,
hey, what wouldn't work. And one of the reasons why I wanted to talk about this is this is what
I know will help in a situation like this. If you train people properly that'll be able to handle these
situations, if you could snap your fingers and have all the schools, you know, be totally safe.
Of course, of course, we'll take that all day long. We don't get to operate in fantasy world.
There's crazy mentally disturbed people out there. And if you haven't listened to that podcast,
I did with Darrell, one of the most shocking statistics that come out came out from it was
in 1955. There were 340 inpatient beds for every 100,000 people in America. That
needed mental health help. 340 beds forever every 100,000 citizens. Those beds were dedicated
for mental health. They had that many available available. They were just not necessarily taken up,
just available. So out of every 100,000 people, there's 370 inpatient mental health beds available
in mental health facilities. In 2007, there was 17. Yeah, 17. So that's a 95% reduction in the amount
of available mental health facilities for people that need help. And by the way, during this time,
we've added all kinds of other crazy things into the mix with drugs, legal drugs, illegal drugs,
prescription drugs, all kinds of media violence, whether it's social media, whether it's violent movies,
whether it's violent videos, all that's added into the mix. The SSRIs, the isolation of
of being on social media in the first place, the breakdown of the family structure, like all
these things are happening. You throw those all those things into the mix and then you have less
mental health available. That's where you end up. It's one of the things that you end up.
So I don't know if the necessarily answered your question about what would not help.
I try and look at what can we actually do immediately to try and start getting people in a
better situation, getting these things freaking moving in the right direction. Yeah, yeah, I was thinking
because I remember you said something about like you were an advocate of like having an
armed guard at the school, right? Where they're retired military or this was a while ago.
And then I remember hearing the option of training teachers or army in the teachers, that's
what it was. So how do you feel about army teachers? It's the same thing. You need to train the teachers.
Are you going to train the teachers? Because you got to train the teachers. Which,
can you train the teachers? Yes, you can. You can train some of them. Someone that want to get
trained. You know, the armed guard thing, my mom was a school principal. And, and then she was
a superintendent of schools. And I remember when these school shootings started happening,
I was immediately like, hey, you should put there should be two dudes sitting in a closet,
you know, with video cameras, closer to television cameras, they're watching what's going on.
And if anything ever happens, they come out and they kill bad guy. I wish I would have been
super vocal about it. Because some of these things would have been stopped a lot quicker.
And then like I said, there's some people that say, well, what kind of world are we living
into when we need to? Let me reprise that because I'm using a horrible voice. Some people say,
hey, what kind of world are we living in? Where we have to put armed guards in a school?
I'll tell you the world that we created. The world that we created, you need to have armed
guards in school because we've got some serious issues, some serious cultural and societal issues
that makes an 18 year old kid want to get a machine gun and go into a freaking school and start killing
kids. That's what's that's why. So if you say to me, what kind of a world are we living in? Where
we need to put armed guards in schools? I will say the United States of America. Do I like it?
Do I like the fact that we have to do that? No. Do I like the fact that I got a, you know,
wear a seat belt when I drive a car? Because I might crash. I don't really like it, but I'm going to do it.
I remember I was in high school when they were security there. They didn't have. They
weren't armed that I knew of, but I feel like granted this is high school, so I'll let me
just go a little bit different. And I'm thinking back if they were armed, I don't think that would
have made that much of a difference. If they were like prison guards, like, you know, ordering
to actually use security guards are pretty mean too to everybody. They were like hosts, you know,
I'd envision it where they should be nice, like almost like, nice teachers almost kind of a
thing like shapper on, you know, sometimes teachers get like yard duty. That's what they call
the school where they got in monitors. It was awesome. No, it's like, well, I'm tired. It's so
elementary school teaches up yard duty, right, certain ones. And basically they just got
sight and recess and just make sure no one acts up or whatever. And no one really acts. Yeah.
Yeah. So what you're talking about is people that are people that are employed at the school
to keep the students in check. Yes. There's a difference between someone that's at school to keep
the students in check and someone that's at school to prevent someone from coming to harm
the students. Yeah. So there's a two different people you'd be looking for. Yes. But in in high school,
one thing with the security, that's what these, and actually there were ladies, two of them.
And they were there. Yes. For to keep people in check in all capacities. But what I'm saying is
maybe one or two levels more advanced, we'll say, is instead of two ladies with just radios,
they were retired military or guys with guns. Not necessarily over with radios. But their presence is
kind of known or whatever. It's not intimidating. It's more of a host kind of scenario.
Like someone who's on the kids side kind of a thing, more so than someone with their eagle eyes open
for any trouble, that kind of thing. Even though that is what they're doing, that's not their
presence. That's not what it feels like. Yeah. You need to be careful with that. If you're going to
have someone that's going to be doing security, they should be doing security. Look, can someone be
dual rolled? Sure. But if you're going to put someone on security, like their purpose is security,
you don't want them breaking up fights over potato chips in the school yard. You know what I'm saying?
Yeah. You want them to be focused on what they're supposed to be focused on.
The good, is it smart to have people that are dual trained? Sure. But someone has to be,
if you put someone on security for the purpose of being on security, they should be on security.
Now, like you said, and like I said, this doesn't mean they need to be walking around with body
armor, visible body armor, and a weapon, and a salt rifle like posted up. They don't need to be
like that. But they, I mean, they could literally be sitting in a central location and a closet with
closed circuit TVs, and when something like this happens, they know what to do. I remember the
the army, the teachers, um, option, and I remember, uh, kind of talking to some of our friends
that are actual teachers, and it kind of put things into perspective, because at first I was like,
yeah, that makes sense. You know, it's not like, you know, give me just a little bit of training,
whatever. But at least it's one more good guy in the field, you know, with, you know, who's armed
in can protect, but then I thought about after talking to some of the teachers, you think about it,
like who wants to become a teacher, and then now becoming a teacher becomes a whole different thing.
Like right now it's like, I'm a teacher. I want to teach these young minds, you know,
to get to the next level in life, and all this, like basically all the things that people pursue
being teachers, yeah, over, um, it shifts to something completely different. Yeah, that being said,
I bet if there was an option where if you're a school teacher, you can go to a four-week
summer course on, you know, active shooter response, and then inside of a school with
30 teachers, there's three people that have been to this course. I think we're, I think I'm feeling
good about that. Yeah. Yeah. And then you were a refresher course every summer, and that you know what I'm
saying, like, you got, you got to train people, you have to train people properly, but people are
willing to train, because it's beneficial in a multitude of different ways. Yeah, that's it.
I never thought about that where it's like kind of the optional training or whatever, because
I was just thinking of it in terms of like, hey, because it's how they, they'd say, I don't, you know,
they don't go into depth or nothing. They're just like, yeah, I'm the teacher, like all the teachers,
they got guns. Yeah. So, so to your earlier question is like, what's a solution that won't work?
The problem with that is the, the problem with that is the details of any solution. You take
any one of these solutions, and there's certain details that would make it better, and some details
if you don't include them, are going to make it a disaster. Like you just throw weapons into every
classroom with random people that haven't been trained, you, you, that's, that's going to be a
problem. Right? Because you got teachers that are that are that are that micro crazy. Right?
There's all kinds of things going on. So, you take any of these solutions, and you take it to a certain
extent. I mean, some of the ways of looking at things can be so different depending on who you are,
that like what's the term they use, reasonable gun control. Reasonable gun control means completely
different things to different people depending on who you are and what you're background is. So true.
And so to just say, hey, we should have reasonable gun control, like I said, that means completely
different things depending on who you're talking to. Yeah. So, that's why for this, for this, I just
want to talk about, hey, here's something I do know about and here's pragmatic solution that will
help and it should be, it should, it should be implemented. Right? That's what you have because
there, there's guys and, you know, this is going to come as an surprise, but when you put into
perspective, where there are people who at six years old, they got their first gun. Six. Yeah.
Yeah. Then same country, same state a lot of time. Maybe even same neighborhood. There are people who
have never shot a gun ever in their life and they're like 60 years old. Yeah. So, you figure someone
who's never shot a gun, never handled the gun or whatever. The idea of a gun potentially can be like,
that is just a death tool. That is just a object of death. So, they just don't know, you know.
And then versus the guy who got their gun at six and guns are all around the house and cases
and the truck and all this stuff where it's like, no, it's not a thing. A death is just a tool
just like a sword hammer or something like that. Where, you know, obviously people say this all the
time where it's like, hey, you know, if someone kills someone with a hammer, you don't outlaw
hammers. It's like they literally feel guns are the same exact category. Seems same. But then
the guy, the person who's never shot a gun, how he's going to feel is like, no, a hammer is to hit
nails. If someone gets all crazy and start hitting heads with it, that's different. Guns are
made to shoot people kind of a thing. That's their attitude, you know, or how they feel about it.
So it's like, yeah, then, okay, now, okay, now we need laws now, right? For the guns,
but these laws apply to everybody. The six year old guy or the gun is gun at six.
And also the guy who's never shot a gun ever in his life, these laws have to apply to both people.
So it's hard to land those laws, you know, effectively where everyone's going to like them.
Yeah, it's very hard. And what makes it even hard to resist that the two sides don't talk to
each other in a reasonable way to try and figure out what would be a reasonable solution.
Yeah, man. So there I am using the reasonable gun laws myself. He's not done.
In big, it's term. Yeah, it's true. Well, and then, yeah, because you kind of,
it makes sense on a certain level, even though it's still not effective, right? Where,
let's say I got a gun. My first gun at six, you know, 22 rifle,
different trick and awesome. I grow up all kinds of guns, right? I have all kinds of guns
of shot. My kids shoot guns, all this stuff. And then you have someone, a whole family of people who live
next door or whatever, across the street. And they have never shot a gun ever in their life and
their scared of them. So now they're like, hey, you know, we'll just say highly intimidated or something like that.
So they come about in their, like, oh my gosh, like a gun or whatever. And then the person who's used
to guns are like, how you're kind of being dumb. You're kind of being unreasonable right now.
Like this gun, you have to pull the trigger shoot. You know, point out something, pull the trigger
for it to shoot, whatever. It doesn't just automatically kill people, right?
So the year dumb for being scared about that kind of stuff, the, it's reasonable that that would
that feeling would kind of take place. You seem saying. And then you have the opposite feeling where
it's like, oh, you guys are gun nuts. Like, you have like, you have 50 guns, 50. I've never shot
a gun in my life. I'm scared of guns and you have 50 of them. Is it unreasonable for me to be uncomfortable?
I feel like that seems pretty normal. It's what I'm saying. So I'm saying like that conflict makes
sense to me. Yeah, there's just a total disconnect. Yeah, ineffective, ineffective for solving problems.
But it's, you can kind of see how it happened. No, you can, you can see how the disconnect occurs.
But it's a disconnect. And the problem with the disconnect occurs when you don't make any attempts
to connect. And I just look at you and say, oh, you are a gun nut and you're crazy. And you know,
I just, it just falls apart. And you look at me thinking, oh, you're a person that wants to take
all my guns away. And so I'm just not talking to you. Yes, you're some chicken, some, you know,
incapable chicken, trying to take away all, you know, my guns. Yeah, disconnect. With that,
if you want to support this podcast, you can go to jockelfuel.com and get yourself some,
get yourself some stuff to make yourself prepared from a physical sense. Because we got to be
prepared mentally. How do you do that? You do that through good training. You got to be prepared physically.
How do you do that? Do good workouts. Train you jitsu. And eat some good food. Take some good
supplementation. Yeah, the training thing the more you think about it. And this might be obvious to
you. But the more you think about you understand how deep training and how valuable training in
every single way. Like you get someone untrained in a situation. I don't even matter the situation.
I don't care if it's swimming in the pool. Okay. So if someone jumps in the pool falls in the pool,
they can't swim or they can't swim very well at all. Now, it's dangerous for them. Now you get
a normal person who just knows how to swim, try to go jump in their encevil. They could get dry. They
could both die now. Now you get one, one person trained. Probably can save everybody. Yeah, exactly.
So, Ben, you can take the most arbitrary thing, seemingly. And you train someone, you're better off.
Yeah, it's weird how people, like the funny thing is to start with leadership because, you know,
I teach leadership. And people think that they should already know how to lead. And so then you start
breaking it down from you like, oh damn, I don't know what I'm doing. Fighting. People think they just
know how to fight. Oh, punch him. When I start to see red, better look out. No, it's like, oh, you
roll with someone that's, you know, a jitsu player or a real boxer. Yeah. Then you go to square off with
somebody. If you've never boxed before and you square off with a boxer, you're done. You're done.
You're done. You're done. You're done. You're done. You get one kick. One kick. If you don't
train more time, you get kicked in the leg one time. Yeah. There's a decent chance you're done fighting.
Yes, sir. Well, from a leg kick, yes, sir. There's a decent chance you call it right there. You're
like, all right, this ain't happened. Yeah. So anything that you do, you, if you want to be good at
something, you know, the, the thing I always use is guitar. There's no more reason that you would be
able to fight or lead without training, then you would be able to play a guitar without training.
Mm-hmm. It doesn't, you just can't, you can't win. You know, like, someone that played basketball
will beat someone that didn't play basketball 100% of the time. Yeah, the best of all when I think
is really good because when you see someone playing basketball, you'd be like, yeah, you just take
that ball, you can't hold it, you got to dribble it or whatever, bounce it and you put in that hoop.
Like, I know what to do. No, when you go try doing it, you're like, you can't even do it. Yeah. Again,
like, if someone's trying to do it too with you or against you, whatever, you can't even do it.
Yeah. So imagine getting a gun that you don't know what to do with it, but you think you know what to
do with it. You know, you think you're just going to shoot or you think that there's going to be a
dynamic situation and an active shooter and you think you're going to know what to do or you think
people are going to be panicking and you think you're not going to be panicking. Yeah. You have to
train and everything that you do. Think about, even you who's kind of trained in a lot of things,
think about how many things like the normal person is trained in pretty much nothing. Yeah, not much.
It's like if you have highly like, if you're highly trained in two things, you're like a jack of
all trades almost kind of a thing. Think about it. But we're not trained in anything. Oh,
but I am. You are. Should you have to think about like all the things to be trained in and I'm not
saying expert. I'm just saying trained. You have like good usable training. What four things?
Five maybe? Yeah. At the most even.
I've got some good stuff to train in training. Yeah. You can get yourself some jockel fuel.
Jockelfield.com. Check it out. Got all by the way, new flavors. Yeah. Updated. Yeah. This is on me.
On me. All right. Yes. You know, I wrote a book called Extreme Ownership. Yeah. Well,
guess what? The early flavors. My fault. Well, here. This is what you did. I understand. I
thought about this. This is what you did. This is all you did. It tastes good. So you know, when you're
when you're young, right? Yeah. Did you ever have those, you know, like on orange juice or whatever
the concentrate, you know, the one where it's like a frozen like sleeve. Yeah. Exactly. And you put it
and you mix water. Right. So if you look at the dirt. Okay. So my mom, my mom, guys, would get that
for us. Right. Orange juice. So it's like four to one or something. Yes. So that's what they did.
They did four. They filled it up four times and put it in the pitcher. Right. The jug or whatever.
So my uncle, sweet. Later on when I grew up in high school, I look at it. I look at the directions.
It's three to one. Seems like they were given us the more watered down version of it. We liked it.
Love it. Because that's what we were used to. Yeah. Seems like. But I tasted the three to one.
I was like, probably this is a little bit too concentrated, a little bit too sweet for me.
Yeah. That's what you did. Yeah. Because they're all used to water. Yeah. It was your main drink
of choice. So you're like, oh, you put some monk fruit in this new energy drink. All this stuff.
It seems like sweet. Sweet. Sweet. To me, you got the four to one going. Yeah. But the three to
one is more our speed. I think a lot of us. It's in. Yeah. It's really like a total. It's almost like
it's almost like I was like nine to one. So anyways, we got all all new flavors. All new flavors.
They're hitting stores right now. Yeah. So go check them out. They all taste so freaking good.
They're we're going to win on taste now. Like we we were kind of crushing everyone because
we're making the healthy and pasteurized. It's sweet and with monk for like that's how we're winning.
We're just still the case by the way. We're still the case. We're still winning. We just made adjustments.
And now we're going to win on taste. So now now you have now you have awesome
awesome upside and awesome flavor and no downside. So there you go. So check that out.
Also you can get them at the fight get this stuff at the vitamin shop. You get it. Get the drinks out.
Wow. Wow. You get the stuff at H.E.B. What is H.E.B. Down in Texas? It's like the big grocery store.
And it's iconic. Everyone loves it. It's like when you're in Texas people are kind of hyped on
H.E.B. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I rolled in the H.E.B. People were hyped. Yeah. So check out H.E.B. We got
you covered there too. Because people have been screaming. Let's face it. Down in Texas people
have been people in the game in Texas and they were I was getting all the time. For years I've
been getting hey H.E.B. H.E.B. Talk us a while. Where in H.E.B. If you're in Texas you know the deal. Go get some.
If you want to get some clothing. That's made in America. Go to originusa.com. We got awesome clothing.
We got haunt mind coming. We got you jutsu geese. We got jeans. We got boots. All of it's made in America.
It's made in America right here. So go check out originusa.com. Help America help your community.
Help the economy. Help shut down slave labor. Just get on board with the program. That's
what you do in originusa.com. And don't forget we have a store. Echo made up the name. What do you call it?
First of you made up the name. It's called actually I didn't know you did it.
It's called jocco store. So if you want to represent trained or untrained but we prefer trained.
But you want to represent in this path. This is where you go free to. Which is true.
What you think about it the more true it becomes. I see you got your shirt locker shirt on today.
Yes sir. One of the favorites. The fan favorites. What's the old with shirt locker?
Sure locker every month you're going to get a t-shirt. Yep. New creative design. Some designs have
controversy behind it. I'm just to say as it turns out some there was a design that a guy emailed in
seemingly nice guy. I don't know obviously but emailed in said hey his wife was offended by the shirt.
Oh dang he needs to return it. Which one is it everyone must get stoned? No. Which one was it?
Good. Anarchy. Rip. Oh okay because she thought it was anarchistic. Yes she was like it looks too much like the
anarchy. I think he knew my head like well good. Okay but I'm just saying. So you made one to
serve another you made like an anarchy sign but it was a D for discipline kind of turn sideways. It was there was a
resemblance. Yeah. Dude it was just kind of a merely a resemblance. It was the straight-up shit.
Oh my be honest it was an homage to the anarchy symbol. There you go. It was straight up. It served
its purpose. I'm just saying it was controversial apparently. Yeah. There you go. Okay. You get those
from time to time but anyway they're creative you know good good these are a new and every month.
Subscribe to this podcast. Subscribe to this podcast. Subscribe to Jocca Underground. We're about to
record some of those Jocca Underground. Answer a bunch of your questions. Talk about life. Talk about
other aspects of life. Go to Jocca Underground.com if you want to if you want to get into the game on that.
It's also how we're gonna survive getting banned. We don't own this platform that you're listening to.
Unless you're listening to on Jocca Underground.com we don't own the platform. So we can get banned. We get
shut down. People don't want to hear what we have to say. So support us that way. We appreciate a YouTube
you check that out. It's psychological warfare. Dakota. Dakota Meyer just got a metal for life saving
and he also so he's out just saving lives as a firefighter. Yeah. So support Dakota. You can
support Dakota by going to flipsidecampus.com and buying something cool to hang on your wall.
Check that out. I've written a bunch of books. You know what the books are. You can check some of those out.
Also have Escalam front where we teach leadership to solve all the problems that you have. Which
are leadership problems? Escalam front.com. Also we have online training at the
extreme ownership academy. Extreme ownership.com. All the little lessons that will help you in every
aspect of your life. This is about leadership. Sure, but it's about life. Go to extremeownership.com.
And enroll. And you'll see me on there. You want to ask me a question? You'll see me on a Zoom call.
I'll be sitting right here saying, oh, explain the details. Give me some context.
So come and check that out as well. And also if you want to help service members active and
retired their families at Gold Star Families. Check out Mark Lee's mom's charity organization.
It's called America's Mighty Warriors dot org. And also check out heroes and horses dot org. Those
guys are out in the field right now. Mike and the crew. And you can find us on the social media stuff.
Don't get isolated on there. Don't get involved. Freaking spun up about the comments. Don't
worry about some jackass. You know, 729 alpha 3 who insulted you. Don't worry about that.
But if you want to say hi, you want to say what's up. Echoes at Echo Charles on that
juggle willing. Go out for the damn algorithm. And to the rest of our troops in uniform out there
right now standing watch 24, 7365. Thank you for what you do. And also, thanks for the service of our
police and law enforcement firefighters, paramedics, EMTs, dispatchers, correctional officers,
border patrol, shout out, get in the done secret service. All first responders. Listen, you have a
complex grinding job that requires you to be a family counselor one minute and a tactical
assaulter the next. And it's a hard job. And we thank you for what you do. And we want to get to
the training that you need to make it happen. And everyone else out there, there's evil in the world.
Evil that we cannot understand. Evil that will attack a schoolhouse filled with children.
Evil that will kill innocent children and kill schoolteachers. And we certainly need to
more than that loss. But we also need to remember that evil is still out there.
And we need to do what we can to be prepared for the next time at Rears. It's ugly head.
And until next time, the Zekko and Joko out.